.TH GRIN 1 "2026-02-14" "grin" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
grin \- make INI files greppable
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grin
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ FILE | \- ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grin
transforms INI files into discrete assignments, making them easy to explore
and filter with standard Unix tools like
.BR grep (1),
.BR sed (1),
and
.BR diff (1).
.PP
Each INI key becomes a dot-separated path rooted at
.BR ini ,
with string values quoted and lines terminated by semicolons.
Section headers produce empty-object assignments
.RI ( ini.section " = {};" )
so the full structure is preserved.
.PP
When invoked with
.B \-\-ungrin
(or as
.BR ungrin ),
the process is reversed: assignment lines are parsed back into INI format.
.PP
If no
.I FILE
is given, or if
.I FILE
is
.BR \- ,
.B grin
reads from standard input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-ungrin
Reverse the operation: turn grin assignments back into INI format.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-values
Print just the values of provided assignments, one per line, without
paths or quoting.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-colorize
Colorize output. This is the default when output is a terminal.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-monochrome
Monochrome output. Disables colorization.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-sort
Don\(aqt sort output. Preserves the original order of the INI file,
which can be faster for large files.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Transform an INI file into greppable assignments:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ grin config.ini
ini = {};
ini.database = {};
ini.database.host = "localhost";
ini.database.port = "5432";
.fi
.RE
.PP
Filter for specific keys using grep:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ grin config.ini | grep host
ini.database.host = "localhost";
.fi
.RE
.PP
Reconstruct a filtered INI file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ grin config.ini | grep pool | grin \-\-ungrin
[database.pool]
max = 10
.fi
.RE
.PP
Read from standard input:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ cat config.ini | grin
.fi
.RE
.PP
Extract just the values:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ grin \-v config.ini
localhost
5432
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failed to open the specified file.
.TP
.B 2
Failed to read input.
.TP
.B 3
Failed to form statements from INI input.
.TP
.B 5
Failed to parse assignment statements (during ungrin).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gron (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR sed (1),
.BR diff (1),
.BR ini (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Charles Y. (Yoshi325)
.SH LICENSE
MIT License. See the LICENSE file in the source distribution.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/Yoshi325/grin/issues
